adding latency config for data prepper (#11196)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _data-prepper/managing-data-prepper/configuring-data-prepper.md

# Configuring OpenSearch Data Prepper

You can customize your OpenSearch Data Prepper configuration by editing the `data-prepper-config.yaml` file in your Data Prepper installation. The following configuration options are independent from pipeline configuration options.

## Data Prepper configuration

Use the following options to customize your Data Prepper configuration.

Option | Required | Type | Description
:--- | :--- |:--- | :---
`ssl` | No | Boolean | Indicates whether TLS should be used for server APIs. Defaults to `true`.
`keyStoreFilePath` | No | String | The path to a `.jks` or `.p12` keystore file. Required if `ssl` is `true`.

> `keyStorePassword` | No | String | The password for keystore. Optional, defaults to empty string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`keyStorePassword` | No | String | The password for the keystore. Optional; Defaults to an empty string.
```

privateKeyPassword | No | String | The password for a private key within keystore. Optional, defaults to empty string.
serverPort | No | Integer | The port number to use for server APIs. Defaults to `4900`.
metricRegistries | No | List | The metrics registries for publishing generated metrics. Currently supports **Prometheus** and **Amazon CloudWatch**. Defaults to **Prometheus**.

> metricTags | No | Map | A map of key‑value pairs as common metric tags to metric registries (max 3). `serviceName` is reserved and defaults to `DataPrepper`. You can also set it with `DATAPREPPER_SERVICE_NAME`. If `serviceName` is defined in `metricTags`, that value wins.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
metricTags | No | Map | A map of up to three key-value pairs that define common metric tags for metric registries. The `serviceName` key is reserved (default is`DataPrepper`). You can override it by setting the environment variable `DATAPREPPER_SERVICE_NAME`. If `serviceName` is included in `metricTags`, it takes precedence.
```

authentication | No | Object | The authentication configuration for the server APIs. Valid option: `http_basic` with `username` and `password`. If not defined, the server does **not** perform authentication.
processorShutdownTimeout | No | Duration | The time given to processors to clear in‑flight data and shut down gracefully. Default: `30s`.

> sinkShutdownTimeout | No | Duration | The time given to sinks to clear in‑flight data and shut down gracefully. Default: `30s`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sinkShutdownTimeout | No | Duration | The amount of time for sinks to clear in‑flight data and shut down gracefully. Default is `30s`.
```

`extensions` | No | Object | The extension plugin configurations shared by pipelines. See [Extension plugins](#extension-plugins).

### Peer Forwarder options

The following section details various configuration options for peer forwarding.

#### General options for peer forwarding

The following table lists the general configuration for peer forwarding.

Option | Required | Type | Description
:--- | :--- | :--- | :---
`port` | No | Integer | The peer forwarding server port (`0`–`65535`). Default is `4994`.
`request_timeout` | No | Integer | The Peer Forwarder HTTP server request timeout, in milliseconds. Default is `10000`.
`server_thread_count` | No | Integer | The number of threads used by the Peer Forwarder server. Default is `200`.
`client_thread_count` | No | Integer | The number of threads used by the Peer Forwarder client. Default is `200`.
`max_connection_count` | No | Integer | The maximum number of open connections for the Peer Forwarder server. Default is `500`.
`max_pending_requests` | No | Integer | The maximum number of tasks in the `ScheduledThreadPool` work queue. Default is `1024`.

> `discovery_mode` | No | String | The peer discovery mode. Valid values are `local_node` (process locally), `static` (fixed list of peers), `dns` (DNS A‑records), or `aws_cloud_map` (AWS service registry). Default is `local_node`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`discovery_mode` | No | String | The peer discovery mode. Valid values are `local_node` (process locally), `static` (fixed list of peers), `dns` (DNS A records), or `aws_cloud_map` (AWS service registry). Default is `local_node`.
```

`static_endpoints` | Conditional | List | The endpoints for all Data Prepper instances. Required if `discovery_mode` is set to `static`.
`domain_name` | Conditional | String | The domain name used for DNS-based discovery (supports multiple A records). Required if `discovery_mode` is set to `dns`.
`aws_cloud_map_namespace_name` | Conditional | String | The Cloud Map namespace. Required if `discovery_mode` is set to `aws_cloud_map`.

> `aws_cloud_map_service_name` | Conditional | String | The Cloud Map service name. Required if `discovery_mode` is set to `aws_cloud_map`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`aws_cloud_map_service_name` | Conditional | String | The AWS Cloud Map service name. Required if `discovery_mode` is set to `aws_cloud_map`.
```

batch_size | No | Integer | The maximum number of records returned on read. Default: `48`.

> aws_region | Conditionally | String | The AWS region to use with ACM, S3, or AWS Cloud Map. **Required** if `use_acm_certificate_for_ssl: true`, or `ssl_certificate_file` / `ssl_key_file` is an S3 path, or `discovery_mode: aws_cloud_map`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
aws_region | Conditional | String | The AWS Region used with ACM, S3, or AWS Cloud Map. Required if:<br> - `use_acm_certificate_for_ssl: true` <br> - `ssl_certificate_file` or `ssl_key_file` is an S3 path <br> - `discovery_mode` is set to `aws_cloud_map`.

```

> drain_timeout | No | Duration | The wait time for the Peer Forwarder to complete processing before shutdown. Default: `10s`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
drain_timeout | No | Duration | The amount of time for the Peer Forwarder to complete processing before shutdown. Default is `10s`.
```

#### TLS/SSL options for Peer Forwarder

Option | Required | Type | Description
:--- | :--- | :--- | :---

> ssl | No | Boolean | Enables TLS/SSL. Default: `true`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ssl | No | Boolean | Enables TLS/SSL. Default is `true`.
```

aws_region | Conditionally | String | The AWS region used with ACM, S3, or AWS Cloud Map. **Required** if `use_acm_certificate_for_ssl: true`, `ssl_certificate_file` / `ssl_key_file` is an S3 path, or `discovery_mode: aws_cloud_map`.

#### Authentication options for Peer Forwarder

Option | Required | Type | Description
:--- | :--- | :--- | :---
authentication | No | Map | The authentication method. One of `mutual_tls` (mTLS) or `unauthenticated` (no authentication). Default: `unauthenticated`.

## Circuit breakers

Data Prepper provides a circuit breaker to help prevent exhausting Java heap memory. This is useful when pipelines have **stateful** processors which retain memory outside of buffers.

When a circuit breaker trips, Data Prepper rejects incoming data routed into buffers until the breaker resets.

Option | Required | Type | Description
:--- | :--- |:---| :---
heap | No | [heap](#heap-circuit-breaker) | Enables a heap circuit breaker. Disabled by default.

### Heap circuit breaker

Configure Data Prepper to trip a circuit breaker when JVM heap reaches a specified usage threshold.

Option | Required | Type | Description
:--- |:---|:---| :---

> usage | Yes | Bytes | The JVM heap usage at which to trip the circuit breaker (e.g., `6.5gb`). If current usage exceeds this value, the breaker opens.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
usage | Yes | Bytes | The JVM heap usage at which to trigger the circuit breaker (for example, `6.5gb`). If current usage exceeds this value, the breaker is triggered.
```

reset | No  | Duration | The minimum time the breaker remains open before new checks. Default: `1s`.

> check_interval | No | Duration | The time between heap‑size checks. Default: `500ms`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
check_interval | No | Duration | The time interval between heap size checks that determine if the circuit breaker should be activated. Default is `500ms`.
```

## Extension plugins

Data Prepper supports user‑configurable **extension plugins**. Extension plugins provide reusable configuration shared across pipeline plugins (sources, buffers, processors, sinks).

### AWS extension plugins

> Add the following to `data-prepper-config.yaml` under `extensions.aws`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use the`aws` extension plugin, add the`aws` parameter to `data-prepper-config.yaml` under `extensions`.
```

## Extension plugins

Data Prepper supports user‑configurable extension plugins. Extension plugins provide reusable configuration shared across pipeline plugins (sources, buffers, processors, or sinks).

> ### AWS secrets extension plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### AWS extension plugin
```

        refresh_interval: <YOUR_REFRESH_INTERVAL>
        disable_refresh: false
      <YOUR_SECRET_CONFIG_ID_2>:
        # ...
```

> {% include copy-curl.html %}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{% include copy.html %}
```

Reference secrets from `pipelines.yaml` under `extensions > aws`:

Option | Required | Type | Description
:--- |:---|:---| :---
secrets | No  | Object | The AWS Secrets Manager configuration. See [Secrets](#secrets) for more details.

### Secrets

> Use the following settings under the `secrets` extension:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `secrets` extension supports the following parameters.
```

Option | Required | Type | Description
:--- |:---|:---| :---
secret_id  | Yes | String | The AWS secret name or ARN.
region | No | String | The AWS region of the secret. Default: `us-east-1`.
sts_role_arn | No | String | The AWS STS role to assume for Secrets Manager requests. Default: `null` (standard SDK behavior for credentials).
refresh_interval | No | Duration | The poll interval for refreshing secret values. Default: `PT1H`. See [Automatically refreshing secrets](#automatically-refreshing-secrets).
disable_refresh | No | Boolean | Disable regular polling for the latest secret values. Default: `false`. When `true`, `refresh_interval` is ignored.

#### Reference secrets

In `pipelines.yaml`, reference secret values in plugin settings using:

* Plaintext: `{% raw %}${{aws_secrets:<YOUR_SECRET_CONFIG_ID>}}{% endraw %}`
* JSON key: `{% raw %}${{aws_secrets:<YOUR_SECRET_CONFIG_ID>:<YOUR_KEY>}}{% endraw %}`

Supported plugin setting types for secret substitution: String, Number, Long, Short, Integer, Double, Float, Boolean, Character.

> Example `data-prepper-config.yaml` with two secret config IDs (`host-secret-config`, `credential-secret-config`):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following is an example `data-prepper-config.yaml` with two secret configuration IDs (`host-secret-config` and `credential-secret-config`):
```

        sts_role_arn: <YOUR_STS_ROLE_ARN_2>
        refresh_interval: <YOUR_REFRESH_INTERVAL_2>
```
{% include copy.html %}

You can then reference these secrets in `pipelines.yaml` as follows:

```yaml
sink:
  - opensearch:
      hosts: [ {% raw %}"${{aws_secrets:host-secret-config}}"{% endraw %} ]
      username: {% raw %}"${{aws_secrets:credential-secret-config:username}}"{% endraw %}
      password: {% raw %}"${{aws_secrets:credential-secret-config:password}}"{% endraw %}
      index: "test-migration"
```
{% include copy.html %}

#### Automatically refreshing secrets

> For each secret configuration, Data Prepper polls the latest value on a regular interval to support rotating secrets in AWS Secrets Manager. Refreshed values are used by plugins that can refresh their connections/authentication (for example, sinks). For multiple secret configurations, a jitter of up to `60s` is applied across all configurations during the initial polling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each secret configuration, Data Prepper polls the latest value at a regular interval to support rotating secrets in AWS Secrets Manager. Refreshed values are used by plugins that can refresh their connections/authentication (for example, sinks). For multiple secret configurations, a jitter of up to `60s` is applied across all configurations during the initial polling.
```
